Section 2.2 The operational semantics of the lambda calculus
15
On the other hand, y is not bound by any A, and so occurs free in the
expression. In general, the value of an expression depends only on the values
of its free variables.
An occurrence of a variable is bound if there is an enclosing lambda
abstraction which binds it, and is free otherwise. For example, x and y occur
bound, but z occurs free in this example:
Ax. + ((ly . + y z) 7) x
Notice that the terms 'bound' and 'free' refer to specific occurrences of the
variable in an expression. This is because a variable may have both a bound
occurrence and a free occurrence in an expression; consider for example
+ x ((Ax. + x 1) 4)
in which x occurs free (the first time) and bound (the second time). Each
individual occurrence of a variable must be either free or bound.
Figure 2.2 gives formal definitions for 'free' and 'bound', which cover the
forms of lambda expression given in Figure 2.1 case by case.
2.2.2 Beta-conversion
A lambda abstraction denotes a function, so we must describe how to apply it
to an argument. For example, the expression
(Ax. + x 1) 4
is the juxtaposition of the lambda abstraction (Ax. + x 1) and the argument 4,
and hence denotes the application of a certain function, denoted by the
lambda abstraction, to the argument 4. The rule for such function application
is very simple:
The result of applying a lambda abstraction to an argument is an instance of
the body of the lambda abstraction in which (free) occurrences of the
formal parameter in the body are replaced with (copies of) the argument.
Thus the result of applying the lambda abstraction (Ax. + x 1) to the
argument 4 is
+ 4 1
The (+ 4 1) is an instance of the body (+ x 1) in which occurrences of the
formal parameter, x, are replaced with the argument, 4. We write the
reduction using the arrow '- ' as before:
(Ax. + x 1) 4 - + 4 1
This operation is called B-reduction, and much of this book is concerned with
its efficient implementation. We will use a series of examples to show in detail
how B-reduction works.
