Section 17.3 Developments in reference-counting
count even though it is not accessible from anywhere else (and hence
garbage). Recent developments in this area are discussed below.
17.3 Developments in Reference-counting
The overheads of reference-counting, and its inability to recover cyc
structures, have often led to its dismissal as a garbage collection technique
except in specialized contexts. However, recent work has made progre
towards alleviating these problems, and the inherently real-time and dist
buted nature of reference-counting is becoming increasingly attractive
parallel architectures gain in importance.
17.3.1 Reference-counting Garbage Collection of Cyclic Structures
Hughes [1982] has suggested an extension to the conventional referen
counting algorithm that would allow it to reclaim circular structures, based
previous work by Bobrow [1980].
The key idea is simple and elegant. We regard the accessible data in t
heap as a directed graph, and divide this graph into its strongly connect
components. In this context we recall that
(i) a graph is strongly connected if, for any two nodes A and B, there is a pa
from A to B, and vice versa;
(ii) a strongly connected component of a graph is a maximal strong
connected subgraph.
Now, it is clear that
(i) if one node of a strongly connected component is accessible, then all
nodes are (and vice versa);
(ii) if we coalesce all the nodes in each strongly connected component, th
the resulting derived graph is acyclic.
But now, since the derived graph is acyclic, it is amenable to convention
reference-counting garbage collection; and when a node of the derived gra
becomes unreferenced, all the nodes of the corresponding strongly connect
component have become unreferenced.
Hughes therefore suggests adding a second reference-count field to ea
node, which either contains the shared reference-count for the strong
connected component of which the node is a part, or is used to point at
node which does hold the shared reference-count. He gives algorithms
incrementally maintaining the information about which components
strongly connected, and shows that they are rather cheap, except where
strongly connected component is broken up.
It appears that this technique can successfully alleviate the 'circular da
