336
Chapter 19 G-code - Definition and Implementation
19.4.6 Summary
We have seen that the technique of implementing generic operations by using
cell tags as pointers to entry tables gives two main advantages:
(i) it is easy to add new node types (indirection nodes, for example);
(ii) it is fast, because generic operations are implemented uniformly using an
indexed jump.
19.5 Getting it all Together
How does all the code we generate hold together? For a start, the G-code for
each supercombinator begins with a GLOBSTART instruction. This instruction
must generate the following segments of target code:
(i) UNWIND code, which checks the number of arguments and rearranges
the stack;
(ii)
i) GC code, which will depend on the garbage collector;
(iii) the entry table for the supercombinator (the EVAL, PRINT, etc. entries
are the same for all supercombinators);
(iv) the function node itself, which can be allocated at the beginning of the
function code, outside the main heap;
(v) overflow-checking code, which immediately precedes the target code for
the function body, and checks for overflow of stack and heap.
Thus the target code for each function is preceded by some code fragments,
the entry table and the function node. This completes the code generation for
each function.
Finally we must consider what the BEGIN and END G-code instructions do.
The BEGIN instruction is responsible for initializing the whole system. In
particular it must generate target code to
(i) initialize the stack pointer EP;
(ii) initialize the heap (in particular, the heap pointer HP).
In any particular system there will certainly be other initialization tasks to
perform, and the BEGIN instruction is the opportunity to perform them.
The END instruction simply terminates execution of the entire program.
19.6 Summary
In this chapter we have seen how an abstract machine model can provide a
precise description for G-code and a secure basis for code generation.
We have also examined some techniques for generating good code. The
details of good code generation are, however, beyond the scope of this book.
