192
Chapter 10 Program Representation
cache, this technique should be regarded purely as an optimization of the
ordinary tagged-cell approach.
In SKIM, however; there are no tags on cells at all. The only tags are in the
fields. This has the advantage that a cell now consists of two identical fields
(instead of two identical fields plus a tag), which allows a more uniform
hardware design for SKIM. However, it means that a cell cannot change its
tag; for example, an application cell must remain an application cell, because
it would be impossible to change the tags of all pointers to the cell at once.
This makes reduction slightly more awkward.
In summary, both a pure tagged cell and a pure tagged pointer approach
can adequately support reduction. The tagged cell approach makes reduction
rather easier, but gives rise to a rather less uniform hardware implementation.
The NORMA cacheing approach is more complex still, but may give some
performance improvement.
10.8 Storage Management and the Need for Garbage Collection
As reduction proceeds we will need to build new pieces of graph. In order to
do so we have to allocate new cells. Cells are allocated from a (large) area of
storage called the heap, which is simply an unordered collection of cells. The
term 'heap' emphasizes that the physical adjacenty of two cells is purely
coincidental; what matters is which cells point to which.
As well as allocating new cells, the reduction process will also discard cells,
or rather it will discard pointers to cells. We must re-use cells whenever
possible, because if we never did so we would soon run out of heap space.
Unfortunately, in a graph there may be many pointers to the same cell, and we
can only re-use a cell when there are no further pointers to it. So long as there
are further pointers to a cell from elsewhere in the graph, it cannot be re-used
because it is still in use. Cells with no pointers to them are said to be garbage.
It is quite tricky to identify garbage cells, and all implementations of
functional languages include a garbage collector whose purpose is to identify
and recycle garbage cells.
The whole activity of cell allocation and garbage collection is called storage
management, and is further discussed in Chapter 17. As we will see there,
fixed-size cells allow for a rather more simple garbage collector than variable-
sized cells.
References
Clarke, T.J. W., Gladstone, P.J.S., Maclean, C., and Norman, A.C. 1980. SKIM -
The SKI reduction machine. Proceedings of the ACM Lisp Conference, Stanford,
Calif. 95044.
Richards, H. 1985. An Overview of Burroughs NORMA. Austin Research Center,
Burroughs Corp., Austin, Texas. January.
