Section 2.4 Recursive functions
25
THEOREM
Church-Rosser Theorem II (CRT II)
If E1 - E2, and E2 is in normal form, then there exists a normal order
reduction sequence from Et to E2-
This is as much as we can hope for; there is at most one possible result, and
normal order reduction will find it if it exists. Notice that no reduction
sequence can give the 'wrong' answer - the worst that can happen is non-
termination.
Normal order reduction specifies that the leftmost outermost redex should
be reduced first.
Thus, in our example above ((Ax.3) (D D)), we would choose the xx-redex
first, not the (D D). This rule embodies the intuition that arguments to
functions may be discarded, so we should apply the function (Ax.3) first, rather
than first evaluating the argument (D D).
The shortest proofs of the Church-Rosser Theorem I (which is the harder
one) are in Welch [1975] and Rosser [1982].
2.3.2 Optimal Reduction Orders
While normal order reduction guarantees to find a normal form (if one exists),
it does not guarantee to do so in the fewest possible number of reductions. In
fact, for tree reduction (see Section 12.1.1) it is provably least favorable, but
fortunately for graph reduction (see Section 12.1.1) it seems that normal
order is 'almost optimal', and that it probably takes more time to find the
optimal redex than to pursue normal order. Some work has been done on
finding more nearly optimal reduction orders that preserve the desirable
properties of normal order [Levy, 1980].
For SK-combinator reduction (see Chapter 16), normal order graph
reduction has been shown to be optimal. This result, among many others on
graph reduction, is shown in Staples' series of papers [Staples, 1980a, 1980b,
[1984].
1980c]. A more accessible treatment of this work is given by Kennaway
2.4 Recursive Functions
We began by saying that we propose to translate all functional programs into
the lambda calculus. One pervasive feature of all functional programs is
recursion, and this throws the viability of the whole venture into doubt,
recursion.
because the lambda calculus appears to lack anything corresponding to
